SANS GIAC Certification Guide: Overview And Career Paths

The SANS Institute offers a number of IT certifications in the information security space. This certification guide will help you get started with SANS certs and develop your security career path.



The SANS Institute was founded in 1989 to provide IT security and administration information and vendor-neutral training on those subjects. Since its inception, SANS has trained more than 100,000 individuals via in-class courses, training events and technical conferences held throughout the world, self-paced online training (called SANS OnDemand) and interactive virtual training (called SANS vLive).

Course topics from the SANS Institute include security essentials, hacking techniques, intrusion detection and incident response, network defense, mobile device security, auditing, digital forensics and related security topics. The "information" component of SANS includes the SANS Reading Room, an extensive library of downloadable security research documents; the Internet Storm Center, which monitors and reports on malicious attacks and provides weekly bulletins and alerts; free security policy templates; the CIS Critical Security Controls for cyber defense and more.

MORE: Free InfoSec Training Resources for IT Pros

SANS GIAC certification program overview

SANS formed the Global Information Assurance Certification (GIAC) program to act as the certification arm for its training courses, ensuring that individuals meet knowledge and skills standards in specific areas of IT security. Nearly 90,000 GIAC credentials have been issued. GIAC certifications are well known and highly respected among employers and the information security industry; even the United States National Security Agency (NSA) recognizes GIAC certifications.  

GIAC offers more than 30 security certifications across introductory, intermediate, advanced and expert levels. According to SANS, GIAC certifications are unique because "they measure specific skills and knowledge areas rather than general infosec knowledge." That means a typical GIAC certification requires rigorous preparation and hands-on experience. That's why SANS training comes highly recommended.  

Note: Another component of SANS is the SANS Technology Institute, which offers two security-related master's degrees — Information Security Engineering (MSISE) and Information Security Management (MSISM) — as well as four post-baccalaureate certificate programs in cybersecurity engineering, cyber defense operations, incident response, and penetration testing and ethical hacking. 

MORE: IT Career Paths & Certification Guides
MORE: Best IT Certifications
MORE: Best IT Training

SANS GIAC Certification Tracks
GIAC certifications fall within various specific certification tracks:

Audit: The lone certification in the Audit track requires candidates to have a firm grasp of auditing concepts, methodologies and risk management techniques. Further, candidates should be able to audit network services and critical systems, networking devices, Unix and Windows services and system information, and web applications. Candidates must also perform vulnerability assessments.
Forensics:  The Forensics track, with five certifications, focuses on the skills required for incident handling and investigations of Windows and Linux computer systems, and smartphones. Credential holders understand data collection and image acquisition, data preservation and analysis, use of the Sleuth Kit and similar tools, anti-forensic techniques, reverse engineering malware and so on.
Legal: The Legal track is aimed at paralegals, attorneys, accountants, auditors and others who must know about laws associated with contracts, business policies and compliance, data retention and e-discovery, intellectual property, and privacy and personally identifiable information. This track has one certification.
Management: The Management track includes three certifications, which focus on skills and knowledge required by security professionals in managerial or leadership positions, or security-related project managers. One of these certifications  ̶  the GIAC Information Security Professional (GISP)  ̶  measures a candidate's knowledge of the (ISC)2 Common Body of Knowledge. It's a natural fit or follow-on for those who've already earned the (ISC)2 Certified Information Systems Security Professional (CISSP) certification.
Security Administration: The Security Administration track is by far the largest, with 18 certifications. Topics include security essentials, incident handling, intrusion analysis, penetration testing (including web applications and exploit research), perimeter defense analysis, Windows and UNIX security administration, wireless networks, mobile device security, cybersecurity, industrial defense, continuous monitoring, critical controls and coder.
Software Security: The Software Security track offers three certifications, which measure a candidate's skills in secure software programming techniques in .NET or Java environments and web applications.
Another certification "category," which is the pinnacle GIAC certification, is the GIAC Security Expert (GSE). Some industry officials consider the GSE to be the premier security-related certification available today. Whereas most GIAC certifications can be achieved by passing a single multiple-choice exam, the GSE exam has a multiple-choice component as well as a hands-on lab.
