What The Circle Can Teach IT Professionals

I am a big fan of social media. As someone who works alone, social media networks act as my water cooler, a chance to interact with other people throughout the day without having to leave my desk and to reach out to colleagues with questions or for support. My days would be mind-numbingly dull without the chance to share my world with someone else for eight hours.

Even so, I am very careful about what I share and how much I share. I don’t “check in” when I’m out for the evening or traveling; in fact, my phone’s GPS is off more than it’s on. I use cash. I’ve been known to use fake data on forms that don’t really need to know intimate details of my life.

MORE: What Mr. Robot Can Teach IT Professionals

Privacy issues are in the news a lot lately, thanks in part to the recent decision by Congress to rescind FCC regulations that halted info gathering by ISPs. Yet, there is a lot of data floating around about all of us that we don’t know about, that is in the hands of companies and IT professionals. Where is the intersection between big data and personal privacy?


That’s what the new Tom Hanks and Emma Watson movie, The Circle, is about. Based on the book by David Eggers, The Circle is about a company (called The Circle) that is Facebook, Twitter, Google, Apple and other social networks rolled into one. The company’s signature software is TruYou, an online identity system that uses big data to combine every aspect of the user’s life into one place. Circlers, as they are called, are completely connected, from their location to their work activities to their health through a Fitbit-like tracker that is able to record everything about your body and health. A new type of webcam, so small it is blends in anywhere and is difficult to find, can “see” everything, virtually everywhere. Transparency is everything; privacy is next to impossible.

“Big data can be incredibly beneficial. Big data is often responsible for breakthroughs in science and medicine. It has the power to look for trends and analyze the tiniest of anomalies. In the right hands big data can change the world,” said Ryan O’Leary, vice president, Threat Research Center with WhiteHat Security.

There is a saying that knowledge can be a dangerous thing, and in the IT world, that knowledge comes in the form of big data. Thanks to big data, you can predict the behavior of your customers. You know what they will likely buy and when they will make the purchase. You can determine quickly when an activity is out of the norm and alert the customer to potential theft. There is so little that you don’t know that there may be a tendency to overuse that information in ways that could make the customer distrustful.

And then there is the storage of all this data. In one scene of the movie, Watson’s character, Mae, is shown an abandoned subway tunnel. This, she is told, is where all of the data collected by the Circle will be stored, once the other large data centers are filled. Every email you send, every breath you take, is retained forever. The movie doesn’t explain why it is important to keep such mundane and minute details of one’s life, but it does serve as a reminder of how much unimportant and unnecessary big data that is saved regularly, without much thought to the damage that can do.

And that leads to the problem with big data: security and ethics.

“The bigger the data you have, the more of a target you are. Storing millions of healthcare records or financial data paints a huge circle on your back, a breach at this level could be catastrophic and the bad guys stand to make a hefty sum if they can do it. Securing this data is of the upmost importance,” O’Leary stated.

As for ethics, O’Leary said imagine a health insurance company with enough records to analyze peoples’ health based on data they have, and then trend that health into the future. You might then be denied coverage because your data suggests you’ll be a liability in 10 years.

The movie gives us the chance to see the good the use of big data for transparency can be (a life is saved) but also how it can destroy (the penalty for living off the grid). The possibilities of big data’s uses can make us greedy. As Mae lived a totally transparent life, we were able to watch the reaction of her millions of followers in “real time.” What was happening was never enough, and her bosses constantly pushed her for more.

“The Circle is all about privacy and information sharing, and what is gleaned from organizations knowing inappropriate amounts about individuals,” Jeannie Warner, security strategist, WhiteHat Security, added. “It’s about the combination of social media exploitation and increasingly inappropriate use of personal information, and how ‘we just want to help’ quickly becomes ‘we want to rule you.’”

One thing big data still can’t control, however, is the weather. The day I went to the theater, severe storms rolled through my area, knocking down trees and cutting out power. As Mae was giving her big speech on how the data gathered by The Circle could be used to control every aspect of a person’s life and totally eliminate privacy, a power surge shut down the movie. While I waited for the worst of the storm to pass before I drove home, I pulled out my phone and shared the incident with my social media network. 
